[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Indigenous people across the
globe have used sacred plants
and animal medicines for
millennia to heal, illuminate,
and connect them
to the web of life.
Traditionally, each
culture had a healer
that works on behalf
of their patients,
what we call the shaman.
And now we find ourselves
in a global village.
Is it any wonder that we
need our own healers that
understand the deep power and
sacredness these ancient earth
medicines can reveal?
My name's Rak Razam, and
I'm an author, filmmaker,
and shamanic facilitator.
Join me as I interview
and sit in ceremony,
experiencing healing
medicines with Western shamans
across the globe.
Watch firsthand as I document
a modern shamanic resurgence
being passed on from
indigenous tribes
to a new wave of medicine people
working in the 21st century.
This is "Shamans of
the Global Village."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In many cultures
around the world,
medicine men and women work
on behalf of their tribe,
healing, divining, and
working with hidden energies.
The Western equivalent
would be a blend
between a doctor, a priest, and
a traveler between the worlds
who can mediate between the
spirits and their patients.
Many of these healers work with
psychoactive plants and animal
materials that
change consciousness.
Others work with trance, dance,
songs, and other modalities.
But if you think
a shaman is just
some archaic figure
wearing feathers and beads,
you may be surprised.
Modern shamans live
in towns and cities,
and we're going to meet one now.
So we're here in
Sonora in Mexico.
It's the county.
And this is the
city of Hermosillo.
And this is where Dr. Octavio
Rettig lives and works.
He is a Western-trained
medical physician,
and he also works with the very
sacred medicine of the Bufo
alvarius toad.
And he works with the
indigenous Seri tribe.
And through them, he also has--
you'll see here on the
stickers of his car,
he has United Nations support.
He's auspiced by them working
with his indigenous medicine.
And he's able to
travel the world.
We're here in his house
here in Hermosillo.
And we're just about to
meet Dr. Octavio Rettig.
Hey, Octavio.
>> Welcome.
Good to have you here, man.
Welcome.
>> Yes sir.
Beginning of beautiful things.
>> Thank you.
I moved here 3 and 1/2 years
after my first encounter
with the toad medicine.
And I started to work as a
physician here in Hermosillo.
Five years ago, I
bought this place,
and I was pretending to create
a drug store in my consultation
room.
But that never happened.
>> So you've been a
freelance-- what is it,
general practitioner?
GP?
>> Yeah, general practitioner.
I was working in a
consultory room with a drug
store and a laboratory.
So I was the physician,
and I had the freedom
to offer the patient
complete integral attention.
Like, I had the
medicines, but I had also
the lab to do all the
consultation of the patients.
And I was doing around
20,000 patients a year.
I had a base of 50 people.
And in one day, I saw 100 people
working as a physician there.
>> You were doing a lot of
patients and a lot of work with
the community.
>> Yeah.
>> Did you enjoy the work?
Are you drawn to the role
as a doctor, as a healer?
>> Absolutely.
Yeah, yeah.
But I felt also a little bit
trapped inside of the room.
And I think that this
medicine, or the work
that I'm doing now
with the toad medicine,
it's helping more
people than the people
that I treat in the pharmacy.
I love to be in service.
But this kind of
medicine, it's more
effective than the
other kind of medicine.
Through these medicines,
you can see that it's
a self-healing process.
And the people are doing
the work by themselves.
And in the Western
medicine, the patient
is waiting for the doctor
to solve their problems.
And we need to be responsible
for our actions and ourselves.
And our habits are the
reason for being sick.
So I think that prevention
and daily activity
and the changing your
patterns of behavior
can be the answer for having
a lower impact into the health
system for the world.
I've seen that
the people now are
addicted to the idea of
finding the answer in a pill.
And it's really difficult to
find the healing to the pharma
industry.
I've seen that the hospitals
are places for going to die.
And we're still having a
lot of fear about death.
But we are also missing the
beautiful quality of life
that nature offered to us and
has offered to us in the past,
that we are really disconnected
of our own origins.
And that's the
reason for madness.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
OK, Rak.
I want to show you the
product of the product
of the medicine of this here.
This is what the natives and
us have collected so far.
And I want to explain to
you the process of how
we collect and do the medicine.
>> So that looks like
a lot of medicine.
>> This is a lot of medicine.
This has been collected
of maybe 1,000 toads.
>> 1,000 toads.
>> Maybe around 10 days,
six or seven people.
This is a lot of--
>> 1,000 toads.
>> --a lot of work.
>> In a bowl.
>> So what we do is we put
the toad under this glass.
We squeeze the gland.
And then the medicine in liquid
projected into the surface
of the crystal.
So then we just scratch the
medicine from the crystal.
And this is the medicine.
So these suffer no any
kind of manufacturing
or transformation.
It's just dried, and--
>> And it crystallizes.
>> It crystallizes, and
that's the medicine.
So it's a really simple process.
And it's completely natural.
We collected the
medicine last night.
And today, it's ready
for being scratched.
And it can be stored and kept
for long periods of time.
So this is one of
the reasons that I
assume that this in the past was
traveling all over the world,
because it's really
easy to transport
and real easy to keep.
>> The toads are nocturnal
creatures that live for nine
months of the year
below the ground,
coming out of hibernation when
the monsoon rains come every
summer.
Their secretions,
when dried and smoked,
contain the king of
psychedelic compounds--
5 methoxy N,N
dimethyltryptamine,
or 5-MeO-DMT.
This molecule is endogenous
to the human brain
and all mammals, and also
exists in many plant species.
It has a rich history of
shamanic use around the world
and has also been
nicknamed the God molecule.
It smells kind of fishy,
like fish food or something.
And they glisten.
I mean, it's this
crystalline structure.
It's sort of pale,
creamy, yellow, golden.
It's so interesting
that it's crystalline.
There's something about
that structure in nature
where it holds a
circuit of energy.
And for that liquid to go into
a crystalline formation just
seems very, very special.
>> It is.
It is something remarkable
that this substance
has existed since a long
time and suffer no any kind
of transformation or change.
It's still being the same.
The toad has suffered no
change, millions of years.
And humans, we are
suffered change.
So I think that
this medicine, it's
really related with
the development
of our consciousness.
>> And so for the average
dose, this is a whole thousands
of toads.
How much is an average
dose for one person?
>> It depends on the size of
the toad and the age of the toad
and the gender of the toad.
Sometimes, small toads
have a lot of medicine.
But we don't know
the differences
between the medicine
or the concentration
inside one toad to
another toad or if there
is any differences
related with the size
or the age or the gender.
>> So not sure.
>> We can see that different
toads have different
concentrations.
And the effect induced
by the medicine,
it's different because of
the reaction of the person.
But I think that's also because
of the toad that contain.
So we are doing
different researches.
We are doing some kind
of a standard dose,
making the powder of
everything and mixing it
so we can have many
different toads
and maybe have a
different experience.
But so far, I prefer just
the flake of one toad.
And the dose that
everyone needs,
it's different depending also
the condition of the body.
It's not only the experiences
with prior medicines.
It's more connected
with the relationship
that people have with the
body, the ability that they
have for breathing, for
moving, for dancing.
And that's an indicator
of the ability
that they have for
connect with other space.
>> To go with the
flow of the medicine.
>> Yeah, instead of
resisting or controlling.
And there is no toxicity or
overdose of this medicine.
But the amount that
you need for having
full, complete experience
is really tiny.
>> And so then you put that
into the delivery mechanism,
into the pipe.
>> Yeah.
Yeah, if we put this in any
kind of fire, any kind of heat,
this will be combusted.
If we use just a
candle or just rocks,
this will be melted
directly into the rock and--
>> Into the air.
>> --provides to everyone
the effect of this medicine.
>> The same intensity effect,
or a lower dose effect?
>> It's as faster and
stronger the flame,
more intense the
effects will be.
>> The latest research in
immunomodulation suggests that
tryptamines like 5-MeO-DMT
can have a beneficial effect
on the human immune system.
5-MeO can suppress inflammation
in the body and retard tumor
growth and autoimmune diseases.
It also suggests that
5-MeO may support
flushing the system
clean of toxic buildup.
Octavio has used
the toad medicine
to treat serious
cases of addiction
to synthetic drugs like
crystal meth and crack cocaine
and has a high success rate with
these patients, both indigenous
and Western.
Even heroin addicts
have seen their desire
for the drug lifted with
no withdrawal symptoms
and insight into the root
causes of their behaviors.
Octavio asks that
his patients not
get lost in the ego-dissolving
psychedelic effect.
Because as well as the
somatic physical cleanse,
5-MeO often induces a
classical mystical experience
of the white light, an
oceanic, all-encompassing void
of unity consciousness.
This spiritual reunion
is the ultimate medicine
to remember who and
what we really are.
>> So this is a regular flame.
And you will see how
the medicine starts to--
>> It vibrates.
>> You can see that it starts
changing the color if last long
time in there, and
also the effect.
This needs to be
ingested really quick.
And if the medicine
burns faster,
than you go with more intensity.
Because this already
lost part of the effect
because it was too
long burn in there.
>> It's like bad coffee.
It goes off a bit.
>> Yeah.
So this is like
an alive molecule.
It's something organic.
I also measure the
amount of the medicine
before being combusted.
And also, I scratch
the residual so I
know how much of the medicine
really has been burned.
And I know that if I
burn 65 milligrams,
and I scratch the residual,
I will have around just 20
to 25 milligrams been consumed.
And that is like the amount
of the 5-MeO-DMT in weight.
So I think that when
you ingest the gas,
you're only ingesting
the 5-MeO-DMT.
And I want to make an
analysis also of this thing
to see what's this.
>> So you think it converts
to some other chemical.
>> I think that we can learn a
lot of the chemical residuals,
but also because I want to find
the same substance in some kind
of archaeological sites.
So that will be the proof
that people in the past
were using this.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
None of the tribes of
the desert or Mexico
remember in recent times
the usage of this medicine.
But the presence
of the toad, it's
among all the ancient
tribes of Mesoamerica.
And I will show you
the evidence that
proves that this
knowledge, it's not new.
And it's directly related
with the most sacred part
of the vision of the world.
>> So this is the
chemical composition,
according to Western science,
of what the neurochemical makeup
of--
is in the toad.
>> Absolutely.
In the drugs.
>> In the drug.
>> This is not what
we are consuming.
This is not the medicine
that we are having.
>> So when you milk the toad and
the secretion is on the glass,
it dries.
We scrape it into those
flakes that we saw.
>> Yeah.
>> And this is--
>> This is the flake.
>> --the drug flakes.
Now, this is interesting.
What are these
chemical signatures?
>> Well, this is all
the different molecules
of the intergens that exist, the
sacred medicines of the planet.
>> So we have LSD, LSA,
the morning glory seeds;
psilocybin, the magic
mushrooms; DMT and 5-MeO--
DMT which occur in
our human brains
and throughout
the plant kingdom;
bufotenin in the toads;
harmine and harmaline
is the constituents
of Ayahuasca;
ibogaine from the ibota plant.
These are actually all
the chemical signatures
of the sacred plant medicines
of the shamans of the world,
aren't they?
>> And the LSD that is the
invention that provides humans
the opportunity to remember
something that already exists
in nature because you can
see that the molecule,
it's exactly the same as LSA.
>> It's just one step
different from LSA,
the morning glories is.
And in a way, LSD is the
Western shamanic medicine.
It was the first really en masse
that the West got in the '60s.
You know what I mean?
>> I think that it's
something in the middle,
something in between the
medicines and the chemical
substances.
I really believe
that nature already
have the perfect
pharmacopeia, and this
is the slide that shows that we
already have the things that we
are looking for.
>> And this is so interesting
because this is what we want
to talk about in this show, is
the fact that the planet makes
or produces or secretes the
essence of her goodness.
And it's the most concentrated
magic enters these plants
and into our own
brains with the DMT.
And they're sacred.
And they're designed
to be taken by humans.
They slot into our
brain structure.
And when we do, we learn a right
relationship with the plants.
And so a synthetic substance
as the West knows--
the West takes all
the sacred substances,
all the way back to tobacco
and cocoa and everything,
and it turns it into a
drug because it doesn't
have right relationship.
It doesn't understand
what to do with it.
>> Yeah.
We broke a sacred pact.
>> We broke the sacred pact,
which is now being re-woven
by these modern shamanic
practitioners like yourself.
>> Absolutely.
>> Thanks.
>> Right.
>> This is a codex of the
foundation of the [INAUDIBLE]
clan.
And you can see a fish.
And at the right of the
fish, there is a toad.
There is also the symbol
of the feathered serpent,
who is standing in a nopal.
This is a symbol of
the Mexican flag.
But this is an ancient
and pre-Hispanic,
pre-Colombian symbol.
But the most interesting
part of this image
is that the clothing of one
of the foundators of the city,
it's the same pattern
that the Mayan who
existed 1,000 years before the
Aztecs, were already using.
And in the art, you will see
the toad and this same pattern,
really.
>> So it's like the
dots on the toad.
And also, it creates, like,
a crisscross latticework,
which is like the--
well, some people
say in the whiteness
of the toad, the void, it's
like the field of being.
It's like the unified field
has a latticework to it.
And then we see it again.
>> Yeah.
This plate is in the
Museum of Anthropology
and History in Mexico City.
And it shows the same pattern
than the one of the toad.
But this same pattern also
appears in the Popol Vuh
in the Mayan tree of life.
>> So all through Mesoamerica.
>> It's all through Mesoamerica.
>> They all have
the toad pattern.
>> This is the Popul Vuh.
This is the creation
of the world.
And you can see the
same pattern and even
the presence of the toad.
Yeah.
>> Well, it's obvious, isn't it?
>> So these ones, these plates
show the same pattern exactly
located on the back of the
toad on the place of the gland.
So the toad and the
glands are shown
in all this art over
and over and over again,
not only in the Mayans, but also
in the Aztecs, in the Olmecs,
in the Toltecs,
and in the legends
of the creation of the world.
You can see clearly that these
guys are smoking something.
They have different
colors in their skin.
They actually look different.
But they are talking
about the same experience.
And you can see here
this jaguar, a snake,
in front of the fish.
>> And the fish is the water,
and the jaguar was the land.
And the toad is
the amphibian which
goes between the two worlds.
>> In the Mayan legends,
the toad is a carrier
of the message of
gods to the humans.
He's the link.
And I think that
this is not myths.
This is something
related with science.
>> It's not a metaphor.
It's true.
>> It's true, actually.
The toad, he's squeezing
himself the gland.
And you can see the
symbol on the gland.
Those three dots are in
many different places.
These are in [INAUDIBLE].
You can see that from the
toad who is marked with an X.
But if you put one X with
another X with another X,
you will build the same pattern.
And the creator of Hunab Ku
have the solar disc in his hand.
>> The creator of Hunab Ku,
the womb of the great mother.
>> The creator, the
creator of everything.
So there is this
building in [INAUDIBLE].
And you can see
the spiral located
in the gland of the toad.
But not only that,
the guy who's emerging
from the jaws of
the toad, he has
both palms of hands inverted.
And they yesterday did the same.
That's a symbol, proof
of the relationship
of this Mayan building and
the 5-MeO-DMT because you
can see people going into
the same position induced
by the Sonoran Desert toad.
So I believe that
this concept that
was all over the world
in the ancient times,
it's related with the experience
induced by the 5-MeO-DMT.
>> And so the toad may not have
been indigenous to all these
cultures.
But the medicine was traded
to different cultures
like Egypt, Peru, Crete,
Greece, Mesopotamia, Bolivia.
>> Yeah.
This can travel, can be stored.
We don't know if in the past
there were more than just one
species like this in the world.
>> And many of these ancient
cultures across the world,
they had their medicine people.
They had their shamans.
They had their own sacraments.
And they would trade with
other cultures the medicines.
>> Absolutely.
It was a global shaman
culture in the past.
Absolutely.
>> And that's what's coming
back full circle right now.
>> Absolutely.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So we're looking for toads
out here in the Sonora County.
And the correct
way to do this is
under the auspices and the
commission of the Seri Tribe.
Don't go looking for these
toads out in the desert.
It's narco drug territory.
It's dangerous.
The police will stop you,
as they just dropped off.
Octavio has documentation
and permissions.
He has all the right protocols
and permission to do this.
It is not something to do.
It is not sustainable,
and it is not right.
It's not ethical to do it
unless you are doing it
under the right auspices
and relationship
with tribal people.
>> But you were speeding.
And not only were
they duly receptive--
>> Yeah because what I'm
doing, it's because--
>> They let you
off with nothing.
>> Anything, nothing.
It's because the work that I'm
doing, it's really important.
These guys are all the time
dealing with the drugs,
stealing people, doing
all kind of felonies.
These guys are
risking their life
because those guys are using
weapons of mass destruction
like the crystal meth.
So those guys know
that I need support.
But they are also
trapped because the laws
that they are defending.
But it's reasonable
people talking.
Communication, it's
the last frontier.
If we can just make
people understand
the importance of what
things are really,
then it's just about being
honest, being sincere, being
clear and not
lying, not bullshit.
And I'm doing nothing wrong.
I'm just doing what
is better for myself.
And even the security
agency of the planet
should be helping me
because I'm dealing
with the worst of the worst
of the worst every day.
>> And you feel like you
get universal support.
>> Absolutely.
You see my universal support.
I have this universal
support all the time.
I've been stopped in
France, in Germany,
in England with the medicine.
And I have enough medicine
for hundreds of people.
And I'm still here because
they see that I'm doing things
right since day one.
I never jump any step.
I never play the smart.
I did no monkey business.
>> Also, while we're talking
about international concerns
here, how did you get to
work under the auspices
of the United
Nations and UNESCO?
>> It was through them.
The Associacion Naciones
Unidas Venezuela, it's ONG,
they work directly
with UNESCO and UN.
Andres Martinez, he's a
researcher from UNESCO,
and he works with NU.
So they invite me to
Venezuela, and they
are dealing with these
international organizations
that are given all the support
and all the logistic and all
the permits to travel
with the sacred medicine.
But in my case, it's
a special situation
because I'm not indigenous.
But I reintroduced this
to the indigenous people,
and I learn the ancient
traditions of them with them.
And then they are giving
me the opportunity
to do this as a gift,
but also because I'm
the only one who is trained
by the medicine itself
to do this for other people.
But sometimes, you can see some
little froggies, like that one,
glowing.
But I want to show you the
difference between these ones
and the toads.
OK, as you can see,
this is a lot of color.
They don't have any glands
on the bottom, yeah?
They don't have-- they just
have the couple of glands.
behind the eyes.
In this case, the
eye of these toads,
it's also a little bit different
than the toad, the Bufo
alvarius.
>> Is this Bufo alvarius?
>> No.
And also, the skin.
You can grab the skin
and feel, like, they
haven't another texture.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah.
>> Doesn't have
the spots, either.
>> No.
Or the glands on the hands
and also on the legs.
Yeah?
There is not any--
OK.
Oh, there is one.
>> Getting out of the car.
>> OK, got one.
Got one.
>> Got one?
Got one, Octavio.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Two babies.
>> You both got one!
No way!
>> Yes way, baby.
>> Outstanding.
>> This is the
Sonoran Desert toad?
>> The Sonoran Desert toad.
>> Thank you, brother.
So the little spots, like jaguar
spots, they'll get bigger?
>> Yeah.
>> So that one must be older.
This one's got littler spots.
>> And the pattern, the glands.
>> What's that thing there?
Their chest vibrates,
and then they--
>> And you can see
different colors even.
This is like yellow.
This is more like
brown or black.
>> Yeah.
Like all natural resources,
the Bufo alvarius toads
are precious.
Now that we've caught
some new specimens,
Octavio releases
the toad he caught
and milked a few nights ago, and
I bid it farewell with a kiss.
>> Bye-bye, baby.
>> OK.
Thanks, Rak.
>> It's not an easy
path to be a shaman.
The initiate has to commit
to being responsible
for the health of
his or her people
and to face their
fears and weaknesses.
They walk between the
worlds of spirits,
singing their medicine
songs to reconnect people
to the web of life.
They bring balance and can
be a much-needed bridge
between the ancestors
and the modern world.
[TRIBAL MUSIC]
What I'm really interested in--
this show is called "Shamans
of the Global Village," right?
And this shaman term
is often misunderstood
and preloaded in the West
with a lot of assumptions
and a lot of dogmas.
And in traditional societies
that have a medicine person,
there's different routes of
coming to this occupation.
Basically, it can be
a hereditary route.
It can be handed down
through the lineage.
And it can be identified
in a son or a daughter,
that they have the aptitude to
be a shaman, the energetics.
Or there can be initiatory
sickness or a crisis,
things like that.
What's your background?
Where are you from, and
how do you find yourself
on this medicine path?
>> Well, I think that
everything in life finds you.
And we all are seekers.
But I wasn't looking
for the things
that I'm doing right now.
In my heart always have
been just pure desire
for helping and being
in service and to share
the love that I
receive in my own life.
And it was through the
plants, sacred plants,
like Salvia
divinorum from Mexico
and the mescaline of
the peyote, that I
had this encounter, this
epiphany, that showed me
that if I choose walking the
path that the medicines were
offering to me, I will
have the opportunity
to use a tool to not only free
myself of my own education
traps and the system
of beliefs that I had,
but also to help other people
to do the same by themselves.
And I was not aware
of how to do this.
>> This is a big point
because people that don't have
experience with plant medicines
that indigenous people have
been caretaking and
having relationships with
for millennia, they just
understand the Western idea
of drugs.
And in the Western culture,
drugs are made in a laboratory.
But the plant medicines
and the animal medicines
are made by nature.
And the medicines, they're
sacred substances that
still affect consciousness.
But they're not just
recreational drugs.
>> No.
And all the people that are
using these recreational drugs
are poisoning themselves.
They are breaking the pact
that we created with nature
since the beginning of
time just for trying
to get high or enjoy a night.
And this is because the lack
of education that we have.
So I was completely a crackhead.
I spent 2 and 1/2
years like that,
trying all the different
ways out, and nothing worked.
I tried go back to any
hundreds of peyotes, hundreds
of mushrooms, tons of LSD.
>> And that didn't help you.
>> And didn't help me to
quit the crack addiction.
>> So what happened the first
time that you smoked the toad
medicine?
>> I just felt this white light,
this dissolution of myself
into the oneness,
and infinite love,
fractals and sacred
geometry and energy.
But the most important
thing that I felt
was the reconnection
with my breath.
>> Is there a sense of it as
an entity or a space that is
spiritual?
It's more than just medicine?
>> It's pure consciousness.
It's pure love.
It's pure energy.
It's pure sound.
It's pure vibration.
It's pure sacred space there.
There is no other kind
of beings or spirits.
There is just this one big,
huge cosmic intelligence.
There is love.
There is energy.
There is light.
And it's inside of
everything, I think.
>> Every indigenous culture
that is on the lands and has
connection to the land and
nature and the plants has words
for this--
Mitakuye Oyasin, great
spirit, God, or unity field,
source consciousness.
I mean, you're saying it's
the unified field of being.
>> Yeah.
The Seris call that
energy the [? Anki ?],
that it's the creator
of everything.
But for me, my own
experience and what
I've seen thousands of times in
people, is that this medicine,
it's the ultimate possible
explosion of these feelings
and emotions inside
of your body.
Meanwhile, you are alive.
>> Yeah.
Thank you, brother.
>> Thank you.
[DRUMMING]
>> So we can see here
through the windscreen,
you can see the toad is
on top of the mountain.
On the crest of
the mountain range
is the shape of
a toad crouching.
It's like the king
of the mountain
overseeing the Seri tribe
in the village below.
And we know in nature,
there's a thing called
the doctrine of signatures.
And for instance, some of the
foods and plants and things
which have a certain shape
correspond to other things,
like walnuts might be
good for the brain.
And in the same
sense, we see nature,
she tells us in the
shape of things,
and she signals
what it is good for.
And in the same way, we see
the toad is in this area,
and it is good medicine,
and it is for these people
and for the world.
[DRUMMING]
The Seri are one of the 13
tribes native to the Sonoran
Desert of Mexico and
neighbors of the Yaqui Indians
that were made popular in the
West in the Carlos Castaneda
novels.
As the narco drug
wars have intensified
near the American-Mexico
border, the Seri
have been afflicted with
poverty, alcoholism,
and drugs that have destroyed
their native ways of life,
their culture, and their land.
Octavio has worked with the Seri
and other tribes for over eight
years, treating addictions
and illnesses first
with Western drugs, then
indigenous medicinal plants
and herbs, and then the medicine
of the Bufo alvarius toad.
The local tribes had forgotten
the power of the toad,
and it took this modern
shaman to reintroduce it.
But their land never forgot.
The land held the
toad within it,
just waiting for the time
for it to be released again.
What's been really
interesting to see,
Octavio, is your work with
the Seri tribe, how you've
introduced it to
the people who need
healing in the community
who have their addictions,
but also to the village elders.
And through them and the
permission they've given,
there are now providers of the
toad medicine in the Seri tribe
who are autonomously
providing the medicine
to those who need it.
Because this work is so big.
It's more than just one
person can handle, isn't it?
>> Absolutely.
Yeah, we need the help and the
support of the whole community
for this.
And the role of the elders
and other people that
have taken the medicine, and
the people who is providing now
the medicine, they are playing
a really important role
for keeping this alive
for the next generations
and to rediscover all the
knowledge that is still being
hiding in the sacred medicine.
>> When you travel the world
and you have your documentation
from UNESCO, in most
countries of the world,
you can bring this medicine.
The toad medicine is illegal in
certain countries of the world,
isn't it?
>> It is.
Yes.
It is illegal in
seven countries.
>> Seven?
Just seven?
>> Seven, yeah.
Not because of
the toad medicine.
It's because of the
synthetic 5-MeO-DMT.
And it's because this
substance is not regulated.
But the toad medicine,
there is no prior research
done with this medicine
in recent times.
So my research is the
first one in Mexico.
And in Mexico, it's legal.
So I've had the permits
through the community
and the biologists of the
community to get the permission
to handle and manipulate the
toads and extract the medicine
and also went to health
system to make them aware
that I was doing this
first with the natives,
and then with the
support of the natives
and international organizations
to the rest of the people
and all over the world.
>> And we've been built
with different tryptamines,
including 5-MeO-DMT, by nature.
What happens, then, when people
endogenously secrete this,
and they go into that state?
You know, Dr. Rick Strassman,
who wrote the book "DMT--
The Spirit Molecule,"
experimented with N,N-DMT.
And he was saying that it could
be the spirit molecule that
helps activate and comes on at
death, near-death experiences,
birth, peak experiences.
And it connects
us to that space.
>> I agree.
And I think that we
are about to rediscover
the importance of these
energies into our lives.
We are seeing it
clearly, day by day.
But this is just a
little tiny proof of this
because people are just having
a little amount of this, just
once or twice or three times.
But what is gonna
happen after people
start to use this for
generations and generations
and generations instead of
getting drunk or use chemical
stimulants that we are
using or the pharma
pills that we are using.
If we start to use again, this
natural extracts of the earth,
maybe we can achieve another
stage of our own evolving.
>> Aho, brother.
Aho.
>> OK, aho.
[SINGING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It's ceremony day, and
we're going to see how Dr.
Octavio Rettig works not
just with indigenous peoples.
He travels the world
introducing this sacred medicine
to people of the West, people
who live in the cities, people
who are distanced
from nature, people
who need this reconnection
of what this medicine brings.
We have some guests with
us here, some Westerners,
who are going to partake of
a ritual shamanic ceremony
on the sacred Shark Island
of the Seri tribe today.
And we'll be working
with the toad medicine
on this sacred island in a very,
very, very special, beautiful,
sacred shamanic ceremony.
>> Tiburon Island is the
biggest island of Mexico,
the sacredest place.
It's like the heart
of the Comcaac nation,
a natural reserve.
And it's a beautiful
place to do the ceremony.
Really special because
in my research,
I have the hypothesis
to think that Atzlan,
the legendary island of
the island of the Aztecs,
it's Tiburon Island.
>> My name is Richard.
I'm from Finland.
[MOANING]
>> Awesome, yeah.
I'm Tes Tesla.
I'm from Australia.
[MOANING]
>> My name's Jewelli.
I'm from Byron Bay, Australia.
[GROANING]
>> My name is Dave, Namas Dave.
>> Open your mouth.
Open your mouth.
Dave?
>> Well, welcome to everyone.
I'm Octavio Rettig.
I'm the shaman here.
And I will show you the sacred,
ancient ceremony of the Sonoran
Desert toad here on Tiburan
Island with the elders
and the chiefs of the
community to show to the world
how we do things here.
Thank you very
much, and welcome.
>> So we're here
on Tiburan Island,
the sacred home of
the toad itself,
the Sonoran Desert toad.
And I'm your host,
Rak Razam here
for "Shamans of the
Global Village."
[WHOOPING]
And today is the first,
the last, and the only day.
And I'm so happy to be here,
holding space for the media
we are capturing to show you
the essence of the ceremony
and to try to share some
of the experience of what's
going on here.
I've had a lot of
experience with
different shamnanic medicines
around the world for almost
a decade.
I have only done the toad
medicine once with Dr. Octavio.
And it bridges heaven and earth.
And, well, I don't
want to say I warn you,
but I'm going all the way.
And this could get beautiful.
[CHANTING]
>> I just will need someone to
block the wind with something.
OK?
[CHANTING]
Slow.
I'll let you know when to stop.
Coming, coming.
It's almost there.
Almost there.
Excellent.
You are doing good.
>> All I can say, it felt like
a complete championship battle
of all experience.
It was accessing something very
special, something very holy
that my brain has a
difficult time interpreting.
But I'm still getting slight
messages as to what it was.
I got some good downloads.
And I feel over the next
coming days and weeks,
it's going to keep building up.
And it's going to
keep building up.
And it's gonna
heal me in the ways
that it needs to be healing me.
So this is exactly what
I needed, exactly what
the doctor ordered.
>> Slowly.
>> Well, my expectation for
going into the ceremony was not
to have any expectation, and
I think I maintained that.
I didn't have any
fear stepping in.
I was just open to whatever
was gonna present itself.
And it was absolutely
profound the way
the medicine just
sort of came on.
I just had my whole face
just ripped off and strewn
into the universe,
and I was just
absolutely one with everything.
It was just a hugely--
slightly traumatic, but
immensely gratifying
state to be in.
And being all with one
and part of everything,
it was just this amazingly
black, velvety void
of just nothingness.
It was just so delicious.
>> Blow out.
And go.
>> Overall, I had such
a joy-filled, blissful,
celebratory, uplifting
experience full of body, heart,
mind, multiverse,
heart-opening activation.
The potency and the power of
this source, this spirit that
runs through everything and
just wild ride that it is.
I felt I was in this-- in the
everything, in the immensity,
in the awesomeness of it all.
>> Out through your mouth.
Out.
Now put your lips on.
>> I have had this idea that I
need to find the absolute outer
limits.
For years, I've pushed them
to as far as I possibly can.
More is better.
And I learned that
that is not true.
It's about balance.
It's about ease.
It's about letting it
in and dancing together.
And it's not about power
and dominance and control
and ego and machismo
and all these things.
But it's about softening and
opening up and letting it in.
I mean, that was the spanking
that I needed, and then
the healing from
the healing that I
needed so I didn't
drag myself away
with my tail between my legs.
It was like the perfect
one-two punch-kiss.
>> Out.
Lips on, and slowly.
>> It's as if the entire world
is like a Photoshop layered
program with, like,
600 trillion layers.
And it's three dimensional,
four, five, 12 dimensional.
And all of those layers--
the wind and the sun and
the sea and the people
and the moments
that led up to that
is full of spirit and spirits.
And the spirits are consensually
in on the whole thing.
We're all connected.
And they're
breathing through me.
And the entire universe is
like a cloak that I wear.
Oh, my god.
[CHANTING]
>> You are the water and the
earth and the birds and the sky
and the sun and the moon
and the stars and the ocean.
You are everything!
[MOANING]
[GROANING]
[CHANTING]
You are strong.
It is strong, but
you are strong.
>> We're here in the area
just outside the Seri tribe
in the Sonoran
Desert, essentially.
And Octavio has led us
to one of the caves where
the tribespeople believe--
this used to be all
their territory.
And for the last
few millennia, this
is where people lived before
they were put into the reserve
by the government
and lived in houses.
This is nature.
This is back into the
hills and the mountains
of Sonora in this territory.
And there's a mystical
little cave here,
which has some cave art
in it, which goes back
into the Seri mythology.
And we're going to explore
that now with Octavio.
[CHANTING]
What is your final vision for
your role with this medicine?
>> Unifying the world
of the medicines,
pulling together all the sacred
knowledge of our ancestors
in one place, available for
everyone of this planet.
>> What do you think
that will do for people?
>> Evolution.
>> I mean, there are
so many medicines.
And when Westerners hear
the way of medicine,
they think of aspirin or Prozac.
These are plant
medicines and toad--
these are earth medicines.
What happens when we
take earth medicines?
>> We go back to our origins.
And we are moving folk
forward from the madness
of the evolution that we create
because our egocentricity
and the craziness that exists
in our mind, just our mind.
>> We go back to the earth,
and the earth evolves with us,
her children, as one.
Aho.
>> Aho.
>> The really-- so much amazing
work on so many levels you were
doing, reintroducing the
medicine to the tribe,
and then to the world.
And then not just the medicine,
but the culture and the lineage
and the songs and the
knowledge and the way, the way.
And it's not you.
It's that you have accepted
the call from spirit
to reanchor this medicine
and knowledge and way.
And I think that's why
you are being supported
by the tribe and the people
and the patients and the world.
You have great work to do,
and you are doing great work.
Thank you, brother.
Thank you.
>> Gracias.
>> In the 1960s, author
Marshall McLuhan coined the idea
of the global village, of the
fact that we're all connected.
In ancient days, with
indigenous cultures in a tribe,
in a 1-to-100 ratio,
they might just
have one medicine
person or shaman
per 100 people in the community.
Today, we have 7 billion
people on this planet.
So to match that ratio, we
need 70 million shamans.
So it's not just
about any one person
starting to relearn
and be called
to action by these medicines.
As one person learns,
they magnetize,
and they find the others.
And so now, many,
many people are
being drawn to
the shamanic path,
not just for their
own healing, but to be
the caretakers and the
guardians and the vessels
of these medicines
as they distribute
through the planetary circuit
and into the global village.
[CHEERING]
You have the sacred rattle.
Use it wisely in Australia.
The two cultures meet--
Australia and Mexico, Sonora.
>> That was beautiful.
>> Yeah.